CREATE & CONFIGURE AZURE VIRTUAL MACHINE

Step A - Filter by SQL Server for images.

Step B - Select SQL Server 2014 Enterprise using resource manager deployment model.

Step C - Pick server name, admin user name, password, resource group and location.

Step D - Select machine size (service level).  Big the machine, more the cost.

Step E - Choose the defaults unless you are setting up a virtual network.

Step F - Allow internet access, allow sql authentication, pick sql account and password,
         pick port #, enable automatic patching, and enable automatic backups.

Step G - Confirm choices and hit create.

Step H - The classic VM wizard works fine but is depreciated.

Step I - Download RDP connection information.

Step J - Do not use the temporary drive.  This is for the page file and gets nuked on reboot.

Step K - Use local admin account to log in.

Step L - Tempdb is not configured.  This setting has the most impact along with fast file initialization,
         min/max memory setting, optimize for ad-hoc work loads, and maxdop.

Step M - Engine & Agent running under service accounts.  These can not be added to local policy settings.

Step N - Create local account.  Give rights to directories.

Step O - User SQL Server configuration manager to change the accounts.

Step P - Enable fast file initialization.  Enable lock pages in memory.

Step Q - Size the tempdb for 4 x 1 GB files.

Step R - Set min/max memory.  Min should be obtainable.  We never want to give this up.
         Max is our limit.

Step S - Calculate the max dop setting.

Step T - Enable optimize for add hoc work load.  Set the max dop setting.

Step U - Set end point so that port 1433 is open in our cloud service.

Step V - Add firewall rule for port 1433.

Step W - It is very good that Microsoft is suggesting auto patches & auto backups.


REPORTING - POINT IN TIME - LETS TRY THE DEPLOYMENT WIZARD

Step 01 - Start the deployment wizard.

Step 02 - Specify the on premise source server and database.

Step 03 - Specify the Azure Credential.  This can be obtained from logging into Azure.

Step 04 - Specify Azure Virtual Machine.  Specify SQL Server credentials for database.

    Failure due to fact that new size (service level) is not supported.

Step 05 - Our local, on premise system has SP1 applied.


REPORTING - POINT IN TIME - LETS USE OLD FASHION BACKUP AND RESTORE

Step 10 - Take a copy only backup.

Step 11 - Modify local resource option on RDP connection.

Step 12 - Copy over file from local C: to remote C:

Step 13 - Start the restore process.

Step 14 - Modify the target location if different that the SQL Server default data & log file directories.

Step 15 - Validate the accounts.



REPORTING - NEAR REAL TIME - USE WARM STANDBY

Step 20 - Drop old database.  List & verify backup.  Restore backup with standby file holding
          undo actions for transactions in flight.

Step 21 - Validate there is no DEC 2015 data.

Step 22 - Add data for DEC 2015.

Step 23 - Perform transaction log backup.

Step 24 - Copy over transaction log backup.

Step 25 - Restore transaction log backup.

Step 26 - Validate that DEC 2015 data has arrived on reporting server.







